Title: Sussex
----
Country: England
----
Text: One of the Southern Counties, is varied by the inequalities of the Downs and by intervening valleys to which the wooded scenery and pasture land give a rural and a rich diversity of appearance. It belongs to the chalk, formation, and has some high ranges of clowns and hills. The north is occupied by Wealden formation, covering 420,000 acres, and the south by the chalk formation. On the east are marshes and alluvial lands, and on the west coast it is much indented by, at others it runs out into, bold cliffs.

This county is celebrated for its treed of sheep, which are fed on the South Downs, the name by which they are distinguished. This, and the adjoining counties of Hants and Surrey, were by the Romans denominated Belgae, from the circumstance of their being inhabited by a people called Belgians, who supplanted the British Celts.

The railway communication of the county of Sussex is supplied by the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway Company. The London and Brighton main line, commencing at the London Bridge Terminus, proceeds past Sydenham and Croydon to Reigate, thence enters the county of Sussex at Crawley, and passes due South to Brighton, having branch lines extending along the coast to Lewes and Hastings, and Newhaven to the north, and to Shoreham, Worthing, Arundel, Chichester, Havant, and Portsmouth on the south.

The London and Brighton Railway is 50½ miles in length, and traverses a considerable portion of the counties of Surrey and Sussex.

The Brighton Company was the first to commence running excursion trains, which are now provided by most of the other companies throughout the United Kingdom, as affording a profitable source of revenue to the companies, and being the means of "popularising" the towns, localities, and scenery in connection with the respective lines.

Railways may now be considered as accelerators of pleasure as well as of business, bringing as they do the most favourite watering places along the coast within the compass of a brief and agreeable journey. Of these mediums of transit, we know of few more inviting to the tourist than the one we are about to describe, passing as it does, through a succession of the most varied and diversified scenery, fraught with a host of welcome associations, and terminating at a sea-side town, which fashion in pursuit of pleasure has justly selected for a marine residence.